Gita Themes by Chapter

Story
Warriors
Myth

1.21
“cause my chariot to stand in the middle” <- esoteric?
1.29-31
no desire to fight
1.35 tra_ilokya, sovereignty of the three worlds
1.41 problem: lawlessness, intermixture of caste
1.42 lack of ancestral offerings 
destroys family
“The ancestors of these indeed fall, / deprived of offerings of rice and water”
1.43 “caste duties are abolished”

--

The Bhagavad Gita, while often considered a philosophical work, is also a classic in a literary sense. The work, which consists of conversations between the warrior Arjuna and his mentor, the avatar of Visnhu Krishna,  frequently has no discernerable organization. 

Some significant framing is, however, provided at the outset. The first chapter (or book) presents the inner conflict Arjuna who, arranged in fighting order against his relatives, perceives it as an extreme violation of the family duty (dharma) for him to fight against his kin and states his greater desire to die than to lift up his hand against his relatives. His primary concerns are “conservative” in a classical sense. He is concerned first and foremost about lawlessness that takes place when familial duty is abrogated, including things like intermixture between castes and the lack of performance of the appropriate offerings to the ancestors. 

The logic is something like as follows: if Arjuna takes up his hand against his relatives, this would be an abrogation of familial duty (kuladharma_n.a_m) and caste duty (ja_tidharmas), which is one step on a slippery slope that leads to such obviously terrible things as racial intermixture and the cessation of ancestral offerings. Significant is also that the duties or laws attendent to the family and caste are presented as eternal (“s’a’svatas).  

That these things are stated without justification indicates that they must have been common concerns of the early audience of this text. 



Chapter 2
2  “timidity”  <- K says A lack of courage
7 A: “overcome by pity (karpanya) and weakness (dosa)”
11 “the wise (panditas) do not mourn for the dead or for the living”
12 “neither will there be a time when we shall cease to be”
13 reincarnation
14 physical sensations are impermanent, endure  (cold,heat,pleasure,pain)
15 wiseone (dhi_ram) is unaffected, he is ready for immortality
16 unreal has no being, there is no non-being of the real, the certainty of both these propositions is indeed surely seen by the perceivers of the truth
17 “indestructible” 
18  only bodies come to an end
19 the one who thinks the self is slain or is the slayer does not understand
20 it is not born, it is “birthless, unborn, perpetual, primaeval”
21 How can one who knows this slay “someone” ?
22 they are like garments embodied the embodied one (dehi) encounters
23 weapons / fire / water
24 cannot be pierced / burned / wetted. Unmoving / primeval
25 unmanfiest, unthinkable, unchagable, do not mourn
27 death certain for born, birth certain for dead
28 (DDJ1?) unammifest beginnings, manifest middles, unmanifest ends.
31 there is nothing greater for your caste (kshatriya) than righteous battle (dharmad dhi yuddhacchreyo)
32 gate of heaven
33 evil if avoiding duty (svadharmam)
34 dishonor worse than duty
35 will think you abstained from fear
37 die, heaven (svargam), conqured = earth (mahim)
38 pleasure + pain alike made, gain and loss ,victory and defeat 
39 sankhya / yoga / avoid karma-bondage
40 nothing lost in effort / no progress is lost / discipline (dharmasya) protects 
41 “single understanding  (unity of thought)
42 ignorant “delight in the letter of the Veda” and deny anything else
43 full of desires, addicted to rites, aimed at enojoyment and power
44 ignorant, “attached to enjoyment (bhoga) and power (aisvarya) ”, insight (buddhi) in meditation (samadhau) is not granted
45 vedas are confined to 3 gunas, without, fixed in truth “nityasattvastho”  
46 vedas as useful as well when surrounded by water
47 “right is to action alone” never to fruits, never havea motive for the fruit of the action, no attachment to “inaction”
“acting without regard or desire for the fruits of action is one of the most constant teachings of the bhagavad Gita.”
48 “fixed in discipline (yoga), perform actions”, having (1) abandoned attachment  (2) indifferent to success or failure, samatvam yoga ucyate” “indifference (is) Yoga”
49 action (karma) is inferior to enlightened-discipline (buddhiayogat)
50 buddhiyukto (the disciplined one) casts off “good” and “evil” . “yogah karmasu kausalam”     <- yoga in actions is skill
51 free from bondage of rebirth and pain
52 when you have buddhi, you will be disgusted with the to-be-heard and the heard
53 when (1) disregard "ritual-centered revelation" (srutivipratipanna) (2) non-moving, (3) in samadhivalabuddhis (insight from unmovable meditation), then yoga (self-realization?) attained

----

Krishna's response refuses to treat as important any of Arjuna's concerns. His duty as a member of the Kshitrya caste appears to simply be to act (here, to fight), all of the other duties and concerns stated by Vedic scholars are inconsequential. That  the Vedic scholars (who are the ones presumably responsible for Arjuna's previously stated concerns) not truly know as their learning is from books -- this is illustrated by the divergance of their viewpoints. The other concern of Arjuna's that he will be killing people is also negated, one's body may die but because of reincarnation one does not really kill anything more than the body.

Indeed, there is really only one value stated by Krishna, action, and action can only be fully action when it is performed without heed to the consequnces of the action. One is supposed to be oblivious to both whether or not one dies or kills, or whether or not one acquires power, pleasure, or any number of other things. However, one value does remain in Krishna's response, and this is the "honor" that Arjuna reputedly has and must maintain. A fairly straightforward process is advocated for the attainment of "yoga," one must disregard "ritual-centered revelation" (srtripratipanna), not move, and achieve insight from this unmovable meditation. 


54 A: how does one describe?
-- lots of unmovable/steady: shiaprajnsya, "asya" sthidhis, 
55 K: leaves behind all
56 no desire for pleasure, no passion, anger, fear, steady in thought (sthitadhir)
57 no attachment
58 "withdraws" - limbs like tortoise
59 fasting, no flavor
60 turbulent sense carry away the mind
61 (1) restrain (samyamya) senses, displined (yuktas) sitting, control (in dominion) of senses
62  dwelling on sense objects -> attachment -> desire (kamas) -> anger (drodhas)
63 anger -> delusion -> memory loss -> loss of insight -> destruction
64 no desire/hate -> tranquity
65 tranquil -> steady intellect
66 no wisdom/happiness for uncontrolled/unpeaceful
67 mind follows senses, understanding leaves
68 wisdom of withdrawn senses is firm
69 man of restraint awake in night
70 sage like ocean, waters come in
71 man who abandons desires free from longing
72 in hour of death reaches bramannirvana
---

In Arjuna's question over specific regarding recognition (and presumably practice) Krishna repeatedly emphasizes steadiness. Action, which was previously advocated for in an unrestricted sense, for the moment is exclusively occupied with controlling the senses, achieving discipline in sitting, and control over the mind. The benefits to this practice are stated to be the attainment of peace and a steady intellect in this life (2.65) and brahmannirvana upon death (2.72). However, if the positive side is not compelling, Krishna also depicts a slippery slope of destruction for the one who does not take up the advocated path. In dwelling on sensory objects he becomes attached to them and this desire produces anger. Anger produces in turn delusion, memory loss, loss of intellectual acumen, and ultimately destruction (2.62-63).
Besides sitting, Krishna specifically asks Arjuna to withdraw his limbs like a tortise, presumably referring to a sitting position in which the feet and hands are not extended (potentially but by no means necessary the lotus position known today).

III
Yoga of knowledge vs. yoga of action














